An MCMC algorithm for Bayesian inference of hard polytomies

Modern phylogenetic inference methods are almost exclusively
restricted to the inference of binary trees, in which every ancestral
node has exactly two offspring.  This limitation explicitly precludes
study of hard polytomies: true multifurcations resulting from, for
example, near-instantaneous bursts of speciation (in the
macroevolutionary context) or infection (in the epidemiological
context).

In this talk, I will present a novel Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithm for sampling the space of phylogenetic time trees under
models that allow for hard polytomies. This algorithm is implemented
as an extension of the BEAST 2 phylogenetic inference platform [1],
and can be combined with existing molecular substitution models for
application to a wide variety of molecular data sets.  So far the
sampler has been applied to Bayesian inference under the
Lambda-coalescent [2,3]: a generalization of the Kingman coalescent
supporting multiple mergers of ancestral lineages.

After demonstrating the ability of the algorithm to correctly recover
known polytomies from genetic data sets simulated under a
Lambda-coalescent model, I will discuss a preliminary application of
the algorithm to the joint inference of polytomies and model
parameters from publicly-available Ebola virus genomes sampled from
the Kailahun district of Sierra Leone during the 2014-2015 West
African Ebola virus epidemic.

[1] Bouckaert et al., PLoS Comput Biol, 2014
[2] Pitman, Annals of Probability, 1999
[3] Sagitov, Journal of Applied Probability, 1999
